---
title: "Brew 0013"
subtitle: Rote Kaninchen - Märzen
date: 2018-04-18
publishdate: 2018-05-15
type: brewlog
categories: ["grain to glass"]
tags: ["decoction", "lager", "märzen", "wyeast 2308"]
targets: "OG: 1057 FG: 1014 ABV: 5.6% IBU: 26 EBC: 20 VOL: 19l"
---

I approached this brew with both excitement and trepidation owing to the fact
that I have limited temperature control for fermentation, but really wanted to
try brewing my first lager.

Well, I say my first lager. My first lager was actually a pre-hopped LME kit
beer that I brewed with my housemates in my second year of university. With no
temperature control back then at all, and no concept of how a lager should be
brewed or conditioned, we ended up with something that tasted -- in the words
of our friend Sam -- like Fruit Pastels.

This beer is different in that now I'm in the privileged position of owning a
garage, which at this time of year is at perfect lager brewing temperatures.
I'm also blessed with a spare fridge that is big enough to keep a carboy of
beer safe for an extended period of lagering, and I have Michael Dawson's
wonderful [Mashmaker](http://www.mashmakerbook.com/) to guide me.

**Mash**

Grain Bill:

- 4.6kg Vienna Malt
- 0.2kg CaraRed

Since this is my first lager I thought I'd make it a brew of "firsts" and make
it my first decoction as well. I've been wanting to try a decoction mash ever
since I saw the [Decoction Day](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IIQPQmELWPo)
episode of Brewing TV; however, instead of throwing myself in at the deep end
and trying to reproduce that mash schedule I did a bit of reading around the
subject.

Braukaiser is an excellent resource for this kind of thing and their
[Single Decoction](http://www.braukaiser.com/wiki/index.php?title=Decoction_Mashing#Single_Decoction)
seemed like the perfect entry level decoction. (That and the fact that, as
everyone who has watched the above linked video knows, you have to have the
same number of dogs on the brewday as the number of decoctions; and since I
only have ein hündchen it's only right that I stick to one.)

You can choose to decoct to reach either the sacch rest or mash-out and use
infusion to reach the other. I chose the mash-out because I don't have a
direct-fired mash tun and I wanted to get the mash consistency right at each
stage. According to Braukaiser 2.5 l/kg for the protein rest and 3.5 l/kg for
the sacch rest is authentically German, so I aimed for that.

Mash Schedule:

- 56°C Protein Rest for 30 mins (2.1 l/kg)
- 66°C Saccharification Rest for 70 mins (3.75 l/kg)
  - Decoction after 40 mins; 10 mins to reach boil, boiled for 20 mins (8 litre
    mix of thin and thick mash)
- 70°C Mash-out

The schedule above is an extremely simplified summary of what I managed to hit
-- _not_ what I wanted to hit -- so I'll just go over what went well and what I
need to work on.

The protein rest went OK, but my HLT temp was a little high at 65°C, so I
overshot the target of 55°C ever so slightly with only 10 litres of liquor. My
target was 12 litres, so I know to only heat to around 60°C next time.

Infusion up to the sacch rest also went OK, but only because I preempted the
fact that the HLT temp wouldn't get me all the way and had a backup kettle full
of boiling water to help me out. When the guide says boiling and you use 80°C
liquor for the infusion you're probably going to fall short.

And now the fun begins! I pulled what I thought was around 7 litres of mash for
the decoction, but it looked closer to 8 or 9 in the pot, so I'm not really
sure how much I ended up boiling. However, that wasn't really my main concern;
I was more worried about the fact that my main mash had gone from 66°C to just
under 63°C, so after 10 minutes of boiling I transferred around 3 litres of it
back to the main mash to bring it back up to 65°C.

With hindsight I should have either immediately pulled the same volume back out
to reboil, and turned this into a makeshift double decoction, or just let the
main mash sit, because the reduced decoction I now had wasn't enough to reach
mash-out temps and I ended up only hitting 70°C instead of 78. This therefore
ended up being more like an alpha amylase-favouring sacch rest than a mash-out,
but I wasn't too bothered; I don't normally conduct an explicit mash-out --
instead relying on the sparge water to denature the enzymes -- so I let it be.
In the end I was just happy to have finished a new process more-or-less intact.

Speaking of intact, the malt definitely wasn't. In the words of Dawson the
kernels were "decomposed, degraded, exploded, exploited, smacked around, spoken
badly of... generally abused". I was more than a little worried I'd end up with
a stuck sparge, but since it was a fairly simple batch affair I knew I'd be
able to stir it all back up if it got too densely packed. Luckily it never came
to that.

I drew off the first runnings into a bucket with first-wort hops, then filled
the mash tun with 80°C sparge water, stirred it up, drained, then combined with
the first runnings to reach 24 litres of wort at a pre-boil gravity of 1042.

**Boil**

The original recipe called for 42g of Tradition hops to reach the target
bitterness of 26 IBU, but my LHBS only had Mittelfrüh at 3%AA. That would mean
I'd have to use >70g to hit 26, which I couldn't do because I needed to split
the hops nearly 50/50 with another recipe. I therefore chose to undershoot the
bitterness, but that isn't really a problem considering most of my family and
friends prefer their lagers less challenging in that dimension.

Hop Schedule:

- FWH Hallertauer Mittelfrüh for 21 IBU (56g whole cone @ 3.0%AA)
- T-60 Start of boil
- T-0 Flameout and chill

Pretty uneventful boil. Nothing much to say other than the wort seemed very
clear and the hot break was a lot less than I'm used to (as was the cold break
for that matter). I usually brew with at least some wheat or oats in the grist
so it could be the fact that this is an entirely Reinheitsgebot abiding 100%
barely malt beer, or it could be the decoction having a clarifying effect, who
knows.

Unlike in [brew 0012](http://mchlrhw.github.com/blog/brewlog/brew-0012/), I
wasn't brewing in freezing cold temperatures, so the immersion chiller was
fully operational. I managed to chill down to 25°C in around 30 minutes, but
it slowed so much towards the end I decided to cool the rest of the way in the
fridge. Splashing the wort into a brew bucket provided aeration and another
potential source of cooling and then it went into the fridge until 21:00 that
night.

When I checked the temp I was dismayed to find it was still up at 19°C so I
left it there overnight. This was yet another lesson in the awesome specific
heat capacity of water and the terrible thermal conductivity of air. Maybe
I should have paid more attention in those thermodynamics lectures.

The next morning I had 19 litres of 8°C wort at an OG of around 1058 waiting
to be inoculated.

**Fermentation**

Yeast:

- Wyeast 2308 Munich Lager

I used this yeast instead of 2633 Oktoberfest because the only packs they had
left were from the previous year. When I put the figures into an online starter
calculator it told me there were 0 viable cells left, so I decided not to risk
it, despite Oktoberfest being on offer at half the price. (I don't expect it to
matter all that much, especially considering I've never used either yeast
before so have nothing to compare to.)

After reading everywhere that gargantuan starters are where it's at when
brewing lagers I prepared a 1.5 litre starter in an Erlenmeyer two days before
the brewday and stepped it up to 3 litres in a demijohn one day before.

My plan was to chill it on brewday and decant off the spent beer; however, the
cold loving little beasties resisted my attempt to crash them out and just kept
chugging away. So when it came time to pitch I had no other option but to pitch
the lot. This had the unfortunate effect of reducing the OG to 1053, but on the
plus side at least I'll end up with more beer!

Now if you remember all the way back to the intro you'll recall I mentioned
that I had "perfect lager brewing temperatures" in my garage. Well, I did,
until brewday, at which point the degrees skyrocketed into the 20s due to a
freak heatwave. It's like we went from Winter to Summer with nothing in
between.

This wouldn't have been such a problem due to the fact that I own an also
previously mentioned lager fridge, except, when it came to lagering, I was just
going to set it and forget it. Now I had to manually manage the temperature
because the fridge doesn't have a temperature setting -- just a dial with max,
med, min and off -- and I don't own a temperature controller. This meant I had
to keep switching it to min overnight and then off during the day in order to
keep it between 10 and 12°C. The things we do for love... I mean beer.

I kept up that routine until it had fully attenuated (2 weeks and change) and
then racked into a glass carboy, cranked the fridge temp down all the way and
left it to hibernate for 2 months.

Check back again soon for packaging breakdown and tasting notes.
