---
title: "Brew 0014"
subtitle: "Black Dog - Oatmeal Extra Stout"
date: 2018-06-17
publishdate: 2018-07-29
type: brewlog
categories: ["grain to glass"]
tags: ["extra stout", "oatmeal", "wyeast 1469"]
targets: "OG: 1065 FG: 1012 ABV: 7% IBU: 40 EBC: 35 VOL: 19l"
---

Confession time: this isn't my 14th brew, it's my 15th, but for the sake of
cataloguing brews that were drinkable I'm only going to give beers a number if
they make it all the way to my glass.

My 14th, unnamed and undrinkable, brew went extremely well, up to the point that
I tried to ferment it. I gave decoction another go and the yield was so good
that I ended up extracting way more sugars than I needed and decided to dilute
to 23 litres in order to hit the correct OG. I was extremely pleased with myself
and looking forward to having lots of sessionable wheat beer to drink over the
summer.

I was trying to make a Hefeweizen, and an extra bananery one at that, which
turned out to be my downfall. I had yeast that was too old and in an attempt to
generate more esters through yeast stress I underpitched by neglecting to make
a starter; I just smacked the pack and hoped for the best. This -- combined with
a foray into semi-open fermentation -- was a recipe for disaster and I ended up
with 23 litres of mouldy, foul smelling wort that barely made it off the ground
in terms of fermentation. Hardly the fluffy pillow of white foam I was expecting
after 3 days in the bucket. Needless to say, it went straight down the toilet.

The accepted wisdom for upping ester production in German weizen is to only
pitch one pack and to avoid a starter altogether, which is probably correct if
the yeast is fresh. Personally, after this experience, I will never skip making
a starter again. In future, if I want to underpitch to promote banana flavours,
I'll calculate exactly how many cells that represents and make a starter to
promote that amount of growth. There's just too much variability in pitching
straight from the pack for my liking. Plus, making starters is actually quite
enjoyable; and you get the added reassurance that your army of beasties is ready
to do battle.

Ok, with that little aside over and done with it's time to talk about the beer
that I brewed to replace it...

---

How do you get over the pain of a Hefeweizen that went south? With something 
completely different! And you can't get more different to a sessionable, German,
pale beer, that's best when fresh than a strong, British, dark beer, that
should keep for a few months (if not years).

This is another one from [Mashmaker](http://www.mashmakerbook.com/), which caught
my eye while I was looking for something a bit stronger yet still very drinkable.

I bought the yeast for this at the same time as my failed pack of 3069, so --
being the paranoid android that I am -- I stepped it up from the smack pack with
not one, but 2 starters. Well, it is a strong beer after all, and I don't want
my soldiers flagging.

**Mash**

Grain Bill:

- 4.0kg Maris Otter
- 0.5kg Rolled Oats
- 0.4kg Dark Crystal
- 0.4kg Black Malt

Mash Schedule:

- Single infusion for 60 mins with 15l @ 66째C
- Batch sparge with 15l @ 80째C

I decided this should be a simple brew day given my recent failure. I didn't
want to put too much effort in, in case I had some sort of chronic infection
that would affect this batch as well.

With that in mind I stuck to the recipe and conducted a simple infusion at the
stated temperature. However, me being me, I did feel the urge to overcomplicate
it a bit and decided to try and keep it at 66째C for the full 60 mins, because
in past brews I've experience a 4째 drop over that time. This involved adding
boiling water at 30 mins and 60 mins to get it back up to temp, in addition to
adding boiling water to get it slightly higher for mashout.

After the mash I conducted a simple batch sparge, the first batch of which
ended up at 14l with a gravity of 1070. When it came to the second batch though
I overestimated how much sparge water I'd need and ended up with 15l of 1020
runnings. When combined this would have resulted in nearly 30 litres of
pre-boil volume, which would have been far too much, so I decided to only add
enough second runnings to get up to 24l. The problem with doing this is that
there are valuable sugars left in the discarded runnings. A much better
approach would be to use less sparge water and liquor back if the pre-boil
gravity ends up too high. You could even leave it until after the boil to
liquor back as then you'll be able to judge gravity and final volume more
accurately. Oh well, you live and learn.

**Boil**

Hop Schedule:

- T-60 Styrian Aurora for 40 IBU (40g @ 8.3%AA)
- T-0 Flameout and chill

Nothing particularly interesting about this boil. It took slightly longer
than 60 minutes to get down to 20l @ 1062. As predicted this was below my
target of 1065 due to the lost sugars in the over-diluted second runnings.
Considering I hit my volume pretty much bang on I'm confident the lost sugars
would have brought the gravity all the way up to where I wanted it.

**Fermentation**

Yeast:

- Wyeast 1469 West Yorkshire Ale

In spite of the fact that I pitched a generous amount of yeast it got stuck at
1018 after a week, so I had to rouse it, which seemed to do the trick. It
didn't get as far as 1012, but 1015 will do for me.

**Packaging**

Vessel Breakdown:

- 35 * 50cl Crown Capped Bottles
- 1 * 50cl Crown Capped Bottle (mostly dregs, half filled)

Total yield: ~17.5l

Bottled after two full weeks in primary with no secondary.

At this stage it tasted significantly different to the final product. I could
taste and smell more dried fruit and chocolate notes, which seem to have faded
a bit in the bottle conditioning.

Primed with 100g of golden caster sugar dissolved in as little water as possible
before adding to the bottling bucket in stages as it filled.

**Tasting**

I am very happy with this. This is only the second dark beer I've ever brewed,
the first being a clone of a very popular smoked porter. It wouldn't be fair to
compare them exactly because they're slightly different styles and at different
strengths, but what I will say is that the porter was muddled where this beer is
very refined. I put that down to the simple malt bill of the stout; the porter
had far too many malts and it was difficult to determine what each malt was
contributing to the final beer.

The malt bill of this beer is beautifully simple and you can really tell where
each malt is playing its part. I get a wonderful caramel sweetness mixed with a
slight rum note from the dark crystal, which is enhanced even more by the fruit
contribution of the yeast. From the black malt I get a roasted, almost smokiness,
which takes the rum of the dark malt into the realm of whisky. And the other two
malts provide the backbone of the beer and round it off to prevent any of the
other flavours becoming too overpowering. It is dry and drinkable without being
thin and it's great cold from the fridge or at room temperature after nursing it
for a while (which I tend to do because at 6.2% it's not exactly a session beer).

Never mind being my favourite dark beer that I've brewed, this might be my
favourite brew so far!
