---
title: "Brew 0012"
subtitle: "Pretty Flamingo - Raspberry Wheat"
date: 2018-03-03
publishdate: 2018-04-04
type: brewlog
categories: ["grain to glass"]
tags: ["wheat", "raspberry", "wyeast 1010"]
targets: "OG: 1050 FG: 1012 ABV: 5.1% IBU: 15 EBC: 7 VOL: 23l"
---

This beer has a bit of a history. It's originally from Home Brew Beer by Greg
Hughes, which I first brewed as a partial extract batch way back in 2014. It
went down really well with my wife, so I brewed it again when we were expecting
our first child.

It was really nice celebrating the birth (and her ability to drink again) with
a cold refreshing glass of the pink stuff.

Now we're expecting our second, so it only seemed fitting to dust off this
recipe; however, since brewing this last I've collected all the necessary
equipment to go all-grain, so we'll see how it stacks up against my memories of
the extract version.

**Mash**

Grain Bill:

- 2.7kg Bairds Heritage 1823 London Lager Malt
- 2.3kg Weyermann Wheat Malt (Light)

Mash Temp: 65째C; Mash Time: 1 hour

This -- and most likely all future brew days -- was conducted outside on my
propane burner (owing to the fact that we've just got a new hob that is
incompatible with my HLT/kettle). The air temp was a balmy 0째C so I was
concerned about hitting and maintaining temperature, but it all went pretty
smoothly.

Even so, I took the mash tun inside once I'd doughed in. It ended up at 61째C
which I think I can improve on with the help of some extra cladding.

I gave continual sparging a go for the first time; not so much a fly sparge,
as I don't have a sparging arm, but I was able to achieve a similar effect by
filling up a measuring jug and pouring the liquor through a colander.

I ended up with a pre-boil volume of 22l, which I was happy with at first until
I realised that it should have been more like 27, and, as you'll see after the
boil, that had a big effect on my final yield. The gravity was on the low side
at 1042, but I was determined to see this through without adjusting anything in
order to properly determine my efficiencies and losses.

**Boil**

Hop Schedule:

- T-60 Cascade for 15 IBU (12g @ 8.3%AA)
- T-0 Flameout and chill

Since it was just about freezing out in the open air I assumed cooling would
be a piece of cake. The first obstacle I came up against was that the outside
tap was frozen shut, so I couldn't use my immersion chiller.

The next obstacle was the fact that I didn't have any containers big enough to
hold my kettle, let alone immerse it in water, so I resorted to packing snow
around it in the hopes that it would cool quickly that way.

It turns out that water -- with its very high specific heat capacity -- resists
being cooled quite well and the tiny amount of surface area in contact with the
kettle walls resulted in a very long cool time. I really need to sort out my
cooling options before I attempt to brew in the snow again!

Anyway, the post-boil volume ended up at 18l with a gravity of 1050. I hit the
gravity bang on, despite having less volume than planned. I think this means
that two inefficiencies joined forces to cancel each other out: the mash
efficiency was lower than expected, but that was balanced by a smaller overall
yield (and possibly a higher than expected boil-off). If I had continued
sparging to increase the pre-boil volume the gravity would have been too low,
so it's a good job I got my sums wrong in the end.

Next time I'll bump up the grain bill and the pre-boil volume and I might just
hit that target yield!

**Fermentation**

Yeast:

- Wyeast 1010 American Wheat

I'm getting into the habit of making 1500ml starters, mainly because it gets me
close to "commercial pitching rates" (not that I have a good source for that
info mind you).

I made the starter 2 days prior to brewday in my 2l Erlenmeyer, gave it a swirl
whenever I could (I don't have a stirplate yet) and chilled the night before to
settle.

I love the smell of this yeast in the starter. It's extremely bready at first,
developing peachy, possibly citrus and slightly alcoholic aromas as it gets
going. Anyway, I digress...

On brewday I poured off nearly half the spent wort and pitched around 800ml of
(mostly) pure yeast. That's the first time I've poured off beer from a starter
and it's probably completely unnecessary, but I wanted to minimise any affect
that extra fluid would have on my OG.

Temp at pitching was 19째C. One day later, lots of sulphur from the blowoff,
which got me worried, but it shouldn't have; I've used this yeast before and
it always starts a bit sulphurous. It's a shame considering it smells so good
in the starter flask, but the sulphur dies down after a while and doesn't seem
to make it through to the finished beer.

After 5 days I dumped in 2.1kg (defrosted) frozen raspberries and left for a
further 10 with no secondary.

**Packaging**

I wanted to try something a bit different with this batch so I primed with a
raspberry coulis made from 700g of raspberries and enough sugar to give around
3 volumes of CO2.

This was an attempt to really boost the raspberry aroma by trapping it in the
bottle, but I think I'll just prime with sugar next time as the coulis tended
to settle to the bottom of the bottling bucket despite some mixing with a
spoon.

Another bugbear I have with raspberries that I completely forgot about is the
seeds. They get everywhere! No matter how careful you are with racking and
sieving. And if you get one in your racking cane spring you end up with beer
all over the floor when you switch to the next bottle. I think the end product
is worth the effort though. You just have to _really_ love raspberries... and
your other half!

Vessel Breakdown:

- 12 * 75cl Champagne Bottles (29mm crown caps, not corks)
- 3 * 75cl Swing Tops
- 6 * 50cl Swing Tops (one of which had a lot of dregs)
- 1 * 100cl Growler (mostly dregs)

Total yield: ~15l

**Tasting**

The FG for this beer ended up at 1008 before the raspberries, so that's an ABV
of around 5.3%, but with the sugar contribution from the fruit it could be
higher, depending on how much diluting effect you get from the juice.

Four points lower than the target FG can definitely be detected on the palate;
this beer is _dry_, but it's not overwhelmingly so -- those last 8 points
prevent it from becoming watery or thin. It's possible that most of the
perception of dryness comes from the fruit acid rather than the attenuation.

The raspberry aroma is strong with less in the taste. The taste contribution
from the fruit is more of a tartness than a raspberry flavour. I think it's
probably pushing the limit in terms of how much raspberry I would want in a
beer like this. Not that it's too much, I just think any more and the acidicity
of the beer would be unbalanced and might become stingingly sour on the palate.

Despite being powerful on the raspberry front the fact that it's a wheat beer
is not lost. After the sharp fruit flavour subsides it is replaced with a
smooth graininess from the malt and a very pleasant breadiness from the yeast.

Overall a pretty good result; perfectly carbed for the style and with enough
balance between the fruit and grain that you still remember you're drinking a
beer.

(This was just a quick tasting from one of the 50cl flip tops ahead of the main
stock. Now all I need is for the baby to get a move on and I'll be able to pop
the proverbial cork on one of those champagne bottles that heckle me every time
I go in the garage.)
